Minor release blog post (#484)
keycloak/keycloak-web: blog/2024/release-updates.adoc

:title: Backwards compatibility in Keycloak releases
:date: 2024-08-19
:publish: false
:author: Stian Thorgersen

There will not be a Keycloak 27.0 release, at least for some time. We are certainly not going to stop bringing new
features and enhancements to Keycloak, but we are committed to doing so in a backwards compatible way. Hence, the

> release following Keycloak 26.0 will be 26.1 instead.

Reviewer: I'd prefer the blog post starting with the why we're going for minor releases. While this this sentence grabs all of the attention and is quite a cliffhanger, I'd prefer the why first..

This means that going forwards you will no longer need to refer to lengthy migration guides to upgrade to the latest

> and greatest release, but rather just go ahead and upgrade, and if you run into any issues open a bug and we'll make

Reviewer: When you say "any issue", you probably mean "any regression"? In our 1:1 you went a bit further and also extended that to configuration changes, maybe you want to extend this a bit more?

```suggestion
and greatest release, but rather just go ahead and upgrade, and if you run into any regressions or changes in behavior, open a bug and we'll make
```

sure we resolve the issues quickly. Effectively, any breaking changes you discover as part of upgrading to a new minor
version will be our problem to fix in Keycloak, rather than your problem to adopt to.

In addition to bringing minor releases to Keycloak we are splitting out client libraries to be released separately.

> Client libraries such as the Keycloak admin client, JavaScript adapter, will have an initial 26.0 release, but

Reviewer: Nitpick

```suggestion
Client libraries such as the Keycloak admin client and the JavaScript adapter will have an initial 26.0 release, but
```

after that these will be released as needed, rather than always included in the server release.

For the Keycloak server we plan to do a minor release every 3 months, and a major release every 2-3 years. As before
only the latest release will receive security and bug fixes, but upgrading to the latest release should be a lot

> simpler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
simpler as we'll avoid breaking changes.
```

> For client libraries we will not have any fixed cadence of major or minor releases, but will primarily stick to

Reviewer: For the Keycloak server, adding new REST endpoints is a backwards compatible change. I would assume we would add them in a Keycloak minor release. 

To be able to use this new endpoint with the Keycloak admin client, I expect a new version of the Keycloak admin client. To know which version of the admin client to use with that new Keycloak minor release, I'd suggest to align the admin client minor releases with the Keycloak minor releases. Otherwise people will get confused which version of the admin client to use with what version of the Keycloak server.
This procedure would lead to the admin client possibly skipping some minor releases when there is no change in the admin API in a minor release of the Keycloak server. 

If we plan not to bump the minor release version of the admin client on each Keycloak release, the release notes would need to state with what version of the admin client that release is supposed to work with. 

Would the versioning of the different clients be independent of each other? For that I assume the different clients would live in different repositories. As of today, I see one repo for all Java clients, so would they share a version number?

Reviewer 2: As I mentioned below, I believe we should add more details to the blog post around the release scheme and most importantly support matrix of the client libraries.

Author: Updating

:title: Backwards compatibility in Keycloak releases

> :date: 2024-08-19

Author: ```suggestion
:date: 2024-10-08
```

> :publish: false

Author: ```suggestion
:publish: true
```

:author: Stian Thorgersen

With four major releases of Keycloak every year it can be a daunting task to keep deployments up to date. Especially,
since https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/upgrading/index.html#migration-changes[the number of breaking changes have drastically increased the last couple years].
Combine this with the importance of patching deployments quickly for vulnerabilities, this can leave many deployments

> open to known vulnerabilities as the time and effort required to update to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/security/policy[the latest release] is to costly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
open to known vulnerabilities as the time and effort required to update to https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/security/policy[the latest release] is too costly.
```

Author: Updating

Additionally, currently Keycloak client libraries are released together with the server, resulting in new major versions
of a client library, where in fact there can be no changes at all, or perhaps only a bug fix or two.

For these reasons, after Keycloak 26.0 is released there will be some changes to how Keycloak is being released:

* Keycloak server will have 4 minor releases every year, and a major release every 2-3 years

> * Keycloak client libraries will be released separately

Reviewer 2: This is pretty important change for users IMHO. Should we add some more rough details here on the support matrix of the client libs with Keycloak versions?

Author: Updating

> * Keycloak client libraries will be released separately. The latest client library release will support all currently supported Keycloak server releases

Reviewer 2: As a user, I'd probably want to understand better what exactly are the "all currently supported Keycloak server releases".

Author: Was explicitly not stating that directly - as that means RHBK releases, and in the future may mean LTS releases of Keycloak ;)

> We are certainly not going to stop bringing new features and enhancements to Keycloak, but we are committed to doing so
> in a backwards compatible way, making it seamless and easy to upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will continue to bring new features and enhancements to Keycloak in each release, and we are committed to doing so
in a backwards compatible way, making it seamless and easy to upgrade.
```

A minor release may come with breaking changes, but any such changes will be opt-in. This will be driven through versioning
where the currently default version for a Feature or an API can not change in a minor release, but there can be a new
version that can be explicitly enabled. The current version of a Feature or API can be deprecated in a minor, but will

> not be removed until the next version. This will allow you to gradually roll-out new Feature or API versions separately

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
not be removed until the next major version. This will allow you to gradually roll-out new Feature or API versions separately
```

Author: Updating

> A minor release may come with breaking changes, but any such changes will be opt-in. This will be driven through versioning
> where the currently default version for a Feature or an API can not change in a minor release, but there can be a new
> version that can be explicitly enabled. The current version of a Feature or API can be deprecated in a minor, but will
> not be removed until the next major version. This will allow you to gradually roll-out new Feature or API versions separately
> from upgrading, and you can choose if you want to get ready for the next major release early, or wait and do it in one
> go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a minor comes with breaking changes, such changes will be opt-in. This will be driven through versioning
where the currently default version for a Feature or an API can not change in a minor release, and there will be a new
version that can be explicitly enabled. The current version of a Feature or API can be deprecated in a minor, but will
not be removed until the next major version. This will allow you to gradually roll-out new Feature or API versions separately
from upgrading. You can choose to get ready for the next major release early, or wait and do it in one
go.
```

> Backwards compatibility guarantees will only be given to Features and APIs that are fully supported. Preview features or APIs,
> as well as non-public APIs may change at any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backwards compatibility guarantees will only be given to Features and APIs that are fully supported. Preview features or preview APIs,
as well as non-public APIs may change at any time.
```
